---
layout: post
title:  "Technical roadmaps"
date:   2020-04-25
categories: engineering management
---
SMALL ENGINEERING TEAMS usually have an enormous backlog of new products and features, especially when they are experiencing rapid growth. The natural response to this pressure is to quickly build a minimum viable solution for each product or feature, and then move on to the next solution. However, I think there are advantages to be had by taking the time to formalize a technical plan for the product.

I've observed the same situation on both software engineering teams and data science teams. When I was working as a software engineer for a small R&D company, we were handed numerous projects with tight deadlines. We would build an MVP as quickly as possible, deliver the prototype, and then move onto the next project. The next time we wanted to unshelve one of these solutions, we always had to spend a few hours digging into the code to become reacquainted with the solution architecture.

I have seen the same process on data science teams, and I think there are a lot of parallels between the R&D software world and the data science domain. Data scientists are often asked to complete an analysis with a tight timeline, and once the analysis is complete, the data science team pivots to a new project. There is little time dedicated to formalizing, or closing out, an analysis.

Perhaps this is a first-principles relic of my physics education, but I believe that technical teams of any sort can reap *tremendous* benefits by simply mapping out their processes. Typically when you think of a plan, or a map, you would expect that plan to be created before the work is performed. With R&D and data science this is not always the case, as sometimes you need to experiment with a number of solutions before arriving at **the final solution**. It doesn't matter which came first, the map or the code, but I have come to believe that **creating that map before moving onto the next project** is critical for engineering prosperity.

I like to call these maps *technical product roadmaps*. That is really just a fancy way to say **formalized plan**. The map should explain step-by-step, how a program or analysis works. The roadmap should explain your engineering process in plain English (or French or any other language) *to a five year old*.

Creating the technical roadmap does demand an investment of valuable engineering time, but I think that all engineering teams will find the benefits to pay back this investment many times over. That's a bold generalization, so let's dive into the benefits.

1. **Roadmaps empower communication.**
<br><br>You can show the roadmap to ANYONE, regardless of their technical background. They don't need to be a coder. You can show the roadmap to your manager, your CEO, or POTUS and easily explain WHAT, HOW, and WHY you built the solution the way that you did.

2. **Roadmaps remove dependencies.**
<br><br>Most of the cool products will involve a long series of steps. If this process is living in one person's head, there will always be a dependency on that person. By mapping out the entire process, you remove that dependency and empower anyone on the engineering team to contribute to the solution.

3. **Roadmaps facilitate benchmarking.**
<br><br>A common question aksed of engineering teams is, "Why does that process take so long?" Without a roadmap, your engineers will need to burn a few hours (at least) to dissect the entire process, looking for that one step which is taking 13 hours. With a roadmap, you can benchmark each step and identify which steps merit the most attention.

4. **Roadmaps demand understanding.**
<br><br>To write a roadmap, you need to understand each step of your process, and how they relate to each other. In my experience, many times there have been redundant steps that the engineer was not aware of until they built the roadmap.

The solutions built by R&D teams, and data science teams, are often technically complex. I think all team members will benefit from technical roadmaps which describe the solutions in laymans' English.